---
layout: post
title: "Energy Supply"
date: 2025-08-18 10:00:00 -0500
author: "Ben Johnson"
math: true
toc: true
reading_time: "15 min @ 250 wpm"
references:
---

The real bottleneck to AI progress may be the aging electrical grid. Constraints are starting to emerge as new data centers are coming online and demanding more electricity.

Data centers are power-hungry machines. The US currently has approximately 25 GW of data centers in operation, with 92 GW of capacity in development. **Data center capacity could quadruple by 2030.**

| Data center capacity is measured by the maximum electrical load they can draw from the grid. This is not ongoing consumption, rather it is *power capacity.*

Data centers in the US currently account for 4.4% of total electricity use. In the next five years, data centers could consume close to 16% of the total electricity supply in the US. Supporting this growth will be challenging for the US electrical grid.

The current grid consists of aging infrastructure - most power lines are over 25 years old, and many transformers and power supply units are over 40 years old. How did we get here and what can we do to improve the grid?

## Generation

The electric grid is a marketplace which connects **producers** of energy with **consumers**. On the supply side, utilities own power plants which generate electricity. Power plants use a combination of resources to generate power including **fossil fuels** (gas, coal), **nonrenewables** (nuclear) and **renewables** (wind, solar, hydro).

US electricity demand was relatively flat between 2005-2020, despite a growing population and economy. However over the past 5 years electricity demand has been increasing at a 1-2% annual growth rate due to electric vehicles, data centers, and electrification.

To meet the growing electricity demand, the US needs to invest in more generation. The increased capacity will need to come from renewables, primarily wind and solar. Ignoring any environmental benefits, renewable energy is now by far the cheapest source of electricity.

| Solar and wind have lower OPEX than gas and coal, because their fuel is free. Gas power plants do have a lower CAPEX, but if you combine CAPEX, OPEX and fuel costs, solar and wind are much cheaper than gas. The combined cost is referred to as the **Levelized Cost of Energy (LCOE).**

### Nuclear

**Why can't the US generate more power from nuclear?** A single nuclear reactor can output 1 GW, compared to 100-500 MW for solar and wind farms. Nuclear reactors are not subject to weather patterns, and can deliver a steady output around the clock. Taking this into account, a single nuclear reactor can generate as much electricity as 20 wind farms or 10 solar farms.

Historically, nuclear has been underinvested because of public opinion. After reactor meltdowns at Three Mile Island, Chernobyl and Fukashima, voters and policymakers opposed nuclear development because it was perceived as unsafe. It's worth reading about these incidents in more detail because the failures at each site were the result of specific issues which are avoidable (with the exception of the thousand year tsunami at Fukashima). **More importantly, nuclear has caused far fewer deaths per unit of electricity than gas and coal.**

Nuclear is significantly more expensive wind and solar. The EIA estimates the LCOE of nuclear is `$90-$130` / MWh, compared with `$20-40` / MWh for solar and `$30-50` / MWh for onshore wind. Nuclear reactors have a significantly higher CAPEX because of greater construction costs, financing risk and regulatory timelines.

CAPEX limitations are easy to overcome if you are one of the hyperscalers. Last year Microsoft struck a deal to reopen Three Mile Island, and Google is opening a small nuclear site in Tennessee. Bill Gates and other investors are also investing large sums in companies developing small modular reactors (SMRs).

However, **there are some things money can't buy** and High Assay Low Enriched Uranium (HALEU) is one of them. Uranium enrichment is tightly restricted worldwide because it can be used to develop weapons. The broad categories of enriched uranium are:

{% include energy-nuclear.html %}

Naturally ocurring uranium does not have enough U-235 atoms to sustain a fission reaction. Current reactor designs use LEU which requires uranium enrichment. Uranium supply chain is a bottleneck for the entire nuclear industry as right now there is only one US site capable of enriching LEU.

The next generation of reactor designs use a new type of uranium called HALEU. Being a more efficient fuel, HALEU allows SMRs to operate smaller reactor cores and operate longer before refueling. Most of the startups which Gates and others have invested in require HALEU.

The supply chain for HALEU is even less developed. **Russia operates the only commercial-scale HALEU plant** which means the US lost access to commercial-scale HALEU in 2022. The DOE is investing in a domestic HALEU supply chain but it will not be commercially viable until the 2030s.

For the next 5 years the contribution of nuclear is not likely to increase. As the US brings new nuclear plants online, we are decomissioning old reactors so the contribution of nuclear is at a steady state.

### China

Both the US and China produce around 60% of electricity from fossil fuels. To meet the climate targets set in the Paris agreement, we need to shift the fuel mix in both countries towards renewables. China and the US account for 47% of global carbon emissions, so the fuel mix used to generate electricity in both countries has a massive impact on the climate targets.

This is current fuel mix in the US and China:

{% include energy-supply.html %}

In 2023, the US finally generated more electricity from wind and solar than from coal. Coal generation has been declining as older coal plants are retired and replaced by renewables and gas. The next step to reducing emissions in the US is moving from gas to carbon-free generation. The transition away from gas is challenging because gas plants can quickly come online and fill the generation gap when wind or solar generation falls. More on this later.

China, on the other hand, has been rapidly building new generation to keep pace a growing manufacturing and industrial base. Each year China brings online more power than Germany's entire power generation fleet. While coal is dominant, China is aggressively investing in renewables - they have the largest solar and wind projects in the world.

Centralized planning benefits Chinese electricity supply. China has a surplus of electricity supply, and needs to find ways to balance load during periods of oversupply. Data centers are perfect for this use case - they can be used to consume the surplus power.

## Distribution

Fifty years ago, utilities owned power stations and transmission lines, and sold electricity directly to consumers. This led to a natural monopoly in the electricity market - because of the high upfront costs of laying transmission wires and the low marginal cost of acquiring new customers, electricity markets naturally consolidated to one utility servicing each market.

The path to vertical integration was slightly different between the US and the UK. As electricity markets consolidated in the US, the government formalized the struture by giving utilities exclusive rights in exchange for regulated prices and service delivery.

The UK noticed that service was inconsistent, fragmented and inefficient. The UK nationalized the electric grid in 1947 by creating a single state-owned body (British Electrical Authority) which owned all generation and distribution in the country. For a while, the nationalized system improved service and reliability.

By the 1980s, both systems faced criticism for inefficiency and lack of competition. Both the UK and US solved this through deregulation: transmission and distribution remained regulated monopolies, but generation and retail supply were opened to competition. Independent producers could now sell power into wholesale markets, and consumers could choose their supplier.

Suppliers buy wholesale electricity from generators, and sell retail electricity to consumers. In essense, suppliers aggregate consumer demand and pass it along to the wholesale market.

### Market Clearing

Electricity markets are unique because all trading volume must clear, exactly, at every single point during the day. The total amount of electricity offered by generators must exactly match the amount demanded by consumers.

This is not just for the benefit of consumers. Infrastructure degrades if there is an oversupply or undersupply of electricity. During periods of oversupply, the frequency of AC current can rise above 50/60 Hz which can damage billions of dollars of electrical equipment. Undersupply sags the power frequency which can also damage equipment.

To balance supply and demand, most locales use a day ahead wholesale market where suppliers publish demand forecasts, and producers bid on supplying a customer base. One day in advance, suppliers publish an hourly (half-hourly in the UK) demand forecast for their customer base. This is cross-referenced by system operators who own the transmission lines and grid infrastructure.

Market exchanges collect all demand forecasts and allow suppliers to bid on supplying electricity at a specific volume and price. This process plans how much power will be produced in the grid, and how much electricity will be distributed to consumers.

Forecasts are not always correct, so during the day the transmission system operator steps in to fill the gaps between demand and supply. The TSO has a set of dispatchable resources (mostly gas, coal and nuclear) which they can spin up to meet the power of the grid on demand.

## Consumers

How does electricity get from the generator
On the other side of the electricity marketplace is consumers. Consumers are typically classified as residential, commercial and industrial. The breakdown of energy consumption between commercial and residential is shown below. Commercial power is highly industry dependent - data centers will have a different load curve than a steel manufacturing plant.

Residential consumers can be modeled as very similar to each other. In aggregate the consumption patterns of residential consumers are similar to each other, they might only differ by orders of magnitude. Residential consumers wake up in the morning, start consuming power, then leave for work, and eventually return home and consume the most power in the evening before they go to sleep (cooking, cleaning, laundry).

The problem is that the gap in renewables often coincides with when residential consumers are consuming the most power. When customers return home, there is more demand and less supply, which causes prices to rise.

## Demand Response

There are two levers to balance the grid - adjust supply, or adjust demand. Energy suppliers often won’t have the ability to generate more power, but they can reduce demand. There are a few ways of doing this.

The first is by incentivizing their customer base to switch their consumption patterns using tariffs. Utilities will often use on-peak / off-peak pricing to incentivize consumers to move their consumption to periods of low use. This has a couple of effects on the system:

Power is cheaper during these times, so the supplier and the consumer can both save money by using electricity when it is cheaper.
Fuel mix can be cleaner during these times. This means there is less carbon emissions and we can avoid emitting CO2.

When modeling these systems, you would take a rate by the utility and apply some sort of demand response function which models how the consumers respond to the rates. Of course there are more functions that go into demand response programs than simply adjusting pricing - as with all products, marketing plays a big role as well to make customers aware.

The second type of demand response is physical control, where the supplier or an aggregator will manually intervene to adjust consumer’s consumption habits. This is a lot less intrusive than it might sound at first, if you consider the distributed energy resources in the grid.
